
% vim: set tw=79 sw=3 expandtab:

\documentclass[nobib]{tufte-book}

\input{preamble}

\begin{document}

\input{front-matter}

%%
% Start the main matter (normal chapters)
\mainmatter

\chapter{Distance}
\label{ch:distance}

\newthought{A point}, as introduced in high-school geometry, is a particular,
pure location, without any extent: no length, no width, no height.  An object
such as a curve, a surface, or a volume has points in it.

There is, however, a problem that can arise from imagining a curve (for
example) as \emph{merely} a collection of points.  A point has no length.  Two
points could touch only if they were in the same location, but then they would
be the same point.  So no two distinct points can be in contact.  There is no
arrangement of points, lying in unbroken contact, such that they constitute a
length.  The idea of an unbroken length requires something more than a mere
collection of points.

\begin{marginfigure}
   \begin{center}
   \begin{asy}
      defaultpen(fontsize(8pt));
      settings.prc = false;
      size(4cm,0);
      import three;
      real step = pi/4;
      triple p0 = cos(0*step)*X + sin(0*step)*Y;
      triple p1 = cos(1*step)*X + sin(1*step)*Y;
      triple p2 = cos(2*step)*X + sin(2*step)*Y;
      triple p3 = cos(3*step)*X + sin(3*step)*Y;
      triple p4 = cos(4*step)*X + sin(4*step)*Y;
      path3 a = arc(c=O, v1=p0, v2=p4);
      currentprojection=orthographic(camera=Z);
      draw(a);
      draw(p0--p2--p4, blue);
      draw(p0--p1--p2--p3--p4, red);
   \end{asy}
   \end{center}
   \caption{%
      Convergence toward limiting length of arc.  The integral of the length
      along the curved path is the limit of a sequence of approximate sums.
      The sum of the red distances is a better approximation than the sum of
      the blue distances. The smooth arc is not composed of an infinite number
      of straight segments. That would be a contradiction; a curve is not
      straight.  Rather, the \emph{length} of the curved arc is the limit of a
      sequence of sums of distances.  No sum will in general be equal to the
      length along the curve, but the limit of the sequence of sums can be
      found.%
   }
   \label{fig:arc}
\end{marginfigure}

\newthought{A solution} is found by combining integral calculus with the idea
of the \emph{distance} between two points.  The distance between two points is
the length of the shortest path between them.  The length along a curve is
broken down not into points but into ever smaller distances.  The length along
a curve is the limit of a sequence of sums, each an approximation better than
the previous.  See Figure~\ref{fig:arc}.  Each further sum in the sequence is
the sum of a larger number of smaller distances.  The dimension of the addends
is the dimension of the sum.  So long as the curve be \emph{smooth}, the limit
of the sequence of the sums is the length of the curve.  A curve is smooth if,
for any two points sufficiently close together along the curve, the difference
between their separation distance and the length between them along the curve
is as small as desired.

Just as a length is properly composed of distances, a surface must be composed
of areas, and a space must be composed of volumes.  In turn, the idea of area
and the idea of volume are built upon the idea of distance.

Regardless of the number of dimensions of length a space might have, it can
support basic notions of geometry only if there be a unique \emph{distance}
between every pair of points in the space.  A path through physical space is
not merely a collection of points but also a rule for associating a unique
distance between every pair of points on the path.

\section{Distance and Path}

\section{Geodesic}

\appendix

%%
% The back matter contains appendices, bibliographies, indices, glossaries,
% etc.
\backmatter

\input{fdl-1.3}

\bibliography{my}
\bibliographystyle{plainnat}

\printindex

\end{document}

